The analysis and identification of texture is a key area in image processing and computer vision.   One  of  the  most  prominent  texture  analysis  algorithms  is  the  Gabor  Filter. These  filters  are  used  by  convolving  an  image  with  a  family  of  self  similar  filters  orwavelets  through  the  selection  of  a  suitable  number  of  scales  and  orientations,  which are  responsible  for  aiding  in  the  identification  of  textures  of  differing  coarseness  and directions respectively. While extensively used in a variety of applications, including, biometrics such as iris and facial recognition, their effectiveness depend largely on the manual selection of different parameters values, i.e.  the centre frequency, the number of scales and orientations, and the  standard  deviations.   Previous  studies  have  been  conducted  on  how  to  determine optimal values.  However the results are sometimes inconsistent and even contradictory. Furthermore, the selection of the mask size and tile size used in the convolution process has received little attention, presumably since they are image set dependent. This  research  attempts  to  verify  specific  claims  made  in  previous  studies  about  the influence of the number of scales and orientations, but also to investigate the variation of the filter mask size and tile size for water body extraction from satellite imagery.  Optical satellite imagery may contain texture samples that are conceptually the same (belong to the same class), but are structurally different or differ due to changes in illumination, i.e.  a texture may appear completely different when the intensity or position of a light source changes. A systematic testing of the effects of varying the parameter values on optical satellite imagery is conducted.  Experiments are designed to verify claims made about the in-fluence of varying the scales and orientations within predetermined ranges, but also to show the considerable changes in classification accuracy when varying the filter mask and tile size.  Heuristic techniques such as Genetic Algorithms (GA) can be used to find optimum solutions in application domains where an enumeration approach is not feasible.  Hence, the effectiveness of a GA to automate the process of determining optimum Gabor filter parameter values for a given image dataset is also investigated. The results of the research can be used to facilitate the selection of Gabor filter parameters for applications that involve multi-textured image segmentation or classification, and specifically to guide the selection of appropriate filter mask and tile sizes for auto-mated analysis of satellite imagery.