Particulate  Matter  (PM)  is  a  health  risk,  even  at  low  ambient  concentrations  in  the atmosphere. The analysis of ambient PM is important in air quality management in South Africa in order to suggest recommendations for pollution abatement. However the cost to monitor or to model surface concentrations are high. Satellite remote sensing retrievals of Aerosol Optical Depth  (AOD)  are  cost  effective  and  have  been  used  in  conjunction  with surface measurements of PM concentrations for regional air quality studies. The aim of the study was to determine the extent to which AOD could be used as a proxy for air quality analysis  of  PM  pollution  in  the  Western  Cape,  South  Africa.  Surface  concentrations  of particles with diameter 10 ?m or less (PM10) measured at Air Quality Monitoring (AQM) stations  in  George  and  Malmesbury  in  2011  were  evaluated  using  temporal  air  quality analysis.    The    AOD    were    retrieved    from    the    Moderate    Resolution    Imaging Spectroradiometer  (MODIS)  sensor  onboard  the  Terra and  Aqua satellites.  Temporal trends of the AOD over Malmesbury and George AQM stations were determined and the extent    of    the    AOD-PM10relationship    quantified    through    statistical    correlation. Additionally  meteorological  parameters,  including  wind  speed,  temperature,  rainfall  and relative  humidity  measured  at  the  AQM  stations,  were  included  in  the  study  and  their impact  on  AOD-PM10trends  was  analysed.  The  annual  AOD-PM10correlations  over Malmesbury  in  2011  ranged  between  0.24  and  0.36,  while  the  correlations  over  George ranged between 0.24 and 0.34. A temporal mismatch was observed between seasonal PM10 concentrations and AOD at both sites. The AOD-PM10relationship over Malmesbury and George  were  weak,  suggesting  that  the  AOD  cannot  easily  be  used  as  a  proxy  within  the air  quality  analysis  of  PM10concentrations  measured  at  Malmesbury  and  George  AQM stations.  Specific  meteorological  conditions  were  found  to  be  important confounding factors  when  observing  AOD  and  PM10trends. In  spite  of  a  few  weaknesses  in  current satellite data products identified in this analysis, this study showed that improvements can be  made  to  the  use  of  satellite  aerosol  remote  sensing  as  a  proxy  for  ground  level  PM10mass  concentration  by  addressing  the  meteorological  confounders  of  the  AOD-PM10relationship.