This thesis seeks   to   contribute   to   the   field   of   learning   management   system   (LMS) development  in  tertiary  educational institutions,  particularly to  advance  the  adoption  of learning management systems (LMSes) by exploring the incorporation of socially-motivated discussion forum models. This study proposes a Web-based application, which includes four different   discussion   forum   models   for   LMSes,   in   order   to   test   usability   and   student preferences. The  purpose  of  this  study  was  to  compare  two  non-social  discussion  forums  and  two  social discussion  forums,  to  determine  their  appropriateness  in  terms  of  attributes  or  features  and general functionality for LMSes. The design processes led to the creation   of   a   Web-based   application   called   4DFs,whichincludes four different discussion forum models. Two of these models are non-social discussion forums: the chat room unstructured model and the traditional general threaded discussion. The other two types are social discussion forums, where  users  can  choose  who  they  converse  with: the  Twitter-style  short  comment  feed  and the  Facebook-style. The  chat  room  and  the  traditional  general  threaded  discussion  forums’ features  are  based  on  those  of  Sakai, since  the  research  sample  was comprised  of  students from  the University  of  Cape  Town  (UCT).    The  Twitter-style  and  Facebook-style  elements, such as retweets, hashtags, likes and reposts, are based on Twitter and Facebook. A pilot study was conducted to discover any errors or issues with the experimental procedure. A   controlled   experiment   was then conducted   with   31   students   from   the   institution. Participants  had  to  fill  out  a  background  information  survey  to  gather  some  demographic information  and  to  understand  more  about  participants’  previous  experiences  using  chat rooms,  discussion  forums, and  social  media  applications  for  university  related  purposes  and for  non-university  related  purposes. Following that,  participants  were  given  tasks  to  test  all the features of  the  different  discussion  forum  models.  To  avoid  bias  in  the  participants’ choosing  of  discussion  forum  models,  the  research  was  conducted  with  a  Counterbalanced Measures  Design.  Participants  had  to  fill  in  the  System  Usability  Scale(SUS)  questionnaire in  conjunction  with  their  use  of  the  Web-based  application.  Then,  after  using  all  discussion 
Iv forums, they had to fill out a preferences questionnaire that asked about their preferences of the discussion forums and the features. The Twitter-style  short  comment  feed  model was preferred  in  terms  of  the  ease  of  use  and since participants were  familiar  with  this  forum. This  was  followed  by  the  chat  room unstructured model and the traditional general threaded discussion in terms of these forums’ ease  of  use and students’ preference for the  layout. The Facebook-style was  less  preferable. Also, participants indicated that the post button, reply button, edit, delete, and search button were  more  beneficial  features. Participants  mention  that  the  layout  of  the  chat  room unstructured model was not optimal, since the massive amount of text made it confusing and unclear  to  decipher. Participants  suggested that  including the uploading of media,  allowing private  chat,  adding  extra  features  for  important  posts,  and  using a repost  button int he discussion forums would be more useful. The study found that students preferred that the learning forum include certain characteristics; they prioritised ease of use, less complexity, less interaction and a user-friendly interface over their familiarity with the forum. For learning, there is a need to use the features for a specific purpose so users do not necessarily want extra fancy features (like emojis), instead they want systems that help them to learn efficiently.