Traditional conceptual data languages (e.g. ER, UML and ORM) are not capable of representing evolving data. Representing data that changes over time in conceptual data models and ontologies is required by various application domains such as medical information systems, financial applications and information security systems. To represent time effectively in data models, a language expressive enough to capture the operational semantics of time-varying information is required. Description logics provide formal semantics that characterise temporal conceptual modelling constructs by specifying the structure of conceptual data models. This turn permits reasoning on implicit knowledge. Previous research focused on representing and reasoning on temporal classes and relationships, but had scant support for representing and reasoning over temporal attributes. Partial formalisation of temporal attributes prevents the full utilisation of temporal conceptual data models and tracking the interaction between temporalattributes and temporal classes. Improper representation of temporal attributes in conceptual models leads to inconsistency in databases with respect to the constraints theyhold. This research is centred on logic-based representation of temporal data at the conceptual level which provides a link between temporal conceptual data models anda temporal description logic. Our aim is to properly formalise temporal attributes to create a fully temporised conceptual model. We extend the very expressive temporal description logic language DLRUS with a precise syntax and semantics for temporal attributes, then use it to formalise temporal attributes in a temporal conceptual datamodel. An expressive logic is chosen because it allows us to express many temporal constructs for classes, relations and now attributes. The results from this research can be summarised as follows. Firstly, the result introduces the notion of status attributes which captures the evolution of a temporal attribute as it moves along a temporal object.Secondly, the results provide a mechanism for attribute transition concerning the changeof attribute properties over time as the attribute migrates from one temporal class to thenext. Thirdly, the effect of class inheritance on a temporal attributes have been show clearly. We provide the formalisation of status and transition for temporal attributes aswell as their logical implications which permit the correct behaviour in subsumption and transition.EER++VT is very expressive and allows full temporalisation of attributes but atthe same time it is undecidable. Future work will look at a more decidable language to permit the creation of a tool with these results.
